Hello, dear colleagues. My name is Irina Alexandrovna Evgenievna.
I am a Doctor of Technical Sciences, certified business coach,
partner of the training company ZGroup.
I have practical experience of working on the implementation of the project
of the introduction of electronic systems of operational management of companies.
When it comes to the construction of an organizational structure,
the phrase of Mark Twain comes to mind.
There is nothing easier than to quit smoking. I did it hundreds of times.
The same story happens with organizational structures.
Almost every manager has crossed the structure of his organization many times,
and, putting his hand on his heart, he could admit that the ideal working structure
never worked out.
There were always structural conflicts between managers of the same level.
There were always problems in the interaction of structural units.
There was always a gap between the duties of the position and their real performance,
which depends on a particular living person.
That is why the most useful thing will be to study this course in connection
with such management sections as communication, conflicts,
management of changes in the organization.
The formation of a structure is a practical process.
When it is often more important to try than to think smartly.
But before becoming a composer, a good musician learns to play classical music.
We will start our meeting with a classical approach to the construction of organizational structures.
After studying the first part of the video course, you will get an idea
of such fundamental characteristics of an organization as specialization,
management chain, linear management, norm of controllability,
centralization, formalization.
You will get acquainted with functional, divisional, matrix approaches
to the construction of an organizational structure,
with the features of the organization construction operating on international markets.
During the study of the second part of the video course,
you will get acquainted with the main differences between traditional vertical organizations
and modern training organizations.
The questions of adaptation of organizational structures
to the changes in the strategy and the external environment in which the organization operates,
as well as the questions of the influence of production technologies
and internal interdependencies on the structure of the company.
In the process of performing practical tasks,
you will acquire the necessary skills, analysis and synthesis of organizational structures.
To solve the question of which scheme of the organization is optimal
for specific data conditions,
it is necessary to take into account the various approaches
proposed by the theories of organization formation.
Theories that claim that there is a single rational way of building an organization
are called universal.
Theories according to which the optimal structure can differ from situation to situation
depending on such factors as change of technology and external environment
are called situational.
First of all, a classical approach is considered,
within which the emphasis is placed on structural factors, functions or types of activity
necessary to achieve the goal.
As tasks are determined and their subsequent grouping,
workplaces, departments and other units are formed
for the purpose of effective specialization and coordination of activities
within the framework of a physically normal workload of the leaders.
Then a coordination system is formed
by establishing the subordination of workers and the boundaries of their responsibility
in the hierarchy of management.
For this approach, there are specific attempts to develop the rules,
the so-called principles of the organization,
acting as criteria for the construction of the organization.
Representatives of the School of Human Relations,
along with supporters of the behavioral approach,
study the problems of motivation of people's behavior,
leadership, group and intergroup behavior.
Such studies assess the social and psychological consequences
of various organizational changes
and provide recommendations on improving management procedures,
policies, on creating such an organizational climate and such a structure,
which stimulates the joint efforts of workers to achieve the goals of the organization.
The systematic approach,
where the main focus is on the relationship of interdependence
and the study of the company as a holistic system,
differs from the previous two approaches.
In general, this approach allows to understand the importance of information
and communication channels for the effective activity of the organization.
Various situational theories of the organization,
characterizing the system orientation in general,
emphasize various factors,
adaptation of the organization to the requirements of technology,
uncertainty of the external environment,
peculiarities of decision-making processes.
The last decades, marked by rapid changes in technology,
increasing complexity and scientific capacity of production,
its globalization and the spread of modern information technologies,
gave a new powerful push to theoretical generalizations
and applied scientific research in management.
Ideas and concepts that form the classical theory of the organization
were developed by many scientists and practitioners.
One of the first attempts to analyze organizational aspects of management
was undertaken by Frederick Taylor and his followers.
The ideas and methods that emerge from Taylor's research
are known as scientific management,
in the center of which is the work carried out in the lower link of the organization.
The research on the theory of the organization
began to be carried out on a systematic basis
from 1890 to 1940,
along with deepening of the developments in scientific management.
In the center of attention of these studies is the whole organization,
not the work carried out by individual links or members of the organization.
The principles of the organization,
the criteria for the formation of organizational structures,
the creation of a system of divisions,
the definition of the management and delegation of rights and responsibilities were formulated.
A significant contribution to the development of classical theory
was the development of bureaucratic theory,
the basis of which is contained in the works of Max Weber.
Let's consider in more detail the key definitions of the classical theory of the organization.
Under the organization, the placement and use of resources of the organization
for achieving the strategic goals of the company is understood.
The strategy, that is, what to do, determines the principles of the organization,
that is, how to do.
The process of the organization leads to the creation of an organizational structure
that determines the division of tasks,
as well as the placement and use of resources.
There are two main aspects of the organizational process.
This is the division of the organization into divisions,
respectively, goals and strategies,
and the relationship of powers,
which bind the different levels of management
and provide the possibility of distribution and coordination of tasks.
The complex of formal tasks and the relationship of formal accountability
determines the structure of vertical organizational control.
The characteristics of the vertical structure
are usually reflected in the organizational diagram,
which is a visual representation of the organization structure.
The organizational diagram of the Sokov-Porosly plant is shown in the following slide.
The enterprise performs many different tasks,
the high results of which are achieved in the case of specialization of employees.
The company has four main departments
of finance and accounting, human resources, production and marketing.
In each of the divisions, employees perform only those tasks
that are related to their specialized function.
Within the production department,
specialization is expressed in the division of production tasks
into bottling juices, quality control and technical maintenance.
The means by which the management establishes relations
between levels of authority is delegating.
Delegation, as a term used in the theory of management,
means the transfer of tasks and authority to a person
who takes responsibility for their performance.
Delegation is a means by which the management distributes
countless tasks among employees,
which must be performed to achieve the goals of the entire organization.
If a task is not delegated to another person,
the manager will be forced to perform it himself.
This is simply impossible in many cases,
since the time and abilities of the manager are limited.
Responsibility is a duty to perform the tasks
and be responsible for their satisfactory solution.
In fact, an individual concludes a contract with an organization
to perform the tasks of this position
in exchange for receiving a certain reward.
Delegation is carried out only in the case of taking authority,
and, in fact, responsibility cannot be delegated.
The manager cannot wash away the responsibility
by giving it to his subordinate.
Although the person who is responsible for the solution of any task
does not have to perform it personally,
he remains responsible for the satisfactory completion of the work.
The volume of responsibility is one of the reasons
for the high salaries of the managers of the higher rank.
If it is assumed that some person will take responsibility
for the satisfactory completion of the task,
the organization must provide him with the required resources.
The management carries out this by delegating authority
along with the tasks.
Authority is a limited right to use the resources of the organization
and direct the efforts of some of its employees
to perform certain tasks.
Authority is delegated to a position,
not to an individual who is taking it at the moment.
This is reflected in the old military saying
that honor is given to the uniform, not to a person.
When an individual changes his job,
he loses the authority of his old position
and gets the authority of a new one.
However, since delegating is impossible
until a person is in office,
they usually talk about delegating authority to an individual,
the limits of authority.
According to our definition,
authority is a limited right to use resources
and to command people.
Within the organization,
these limits are usually determined by politics,
procedures, rules and official instructions
in written form or are transmitted by word of mouth.
The persons who go beyond these limits
exceed their authority,
even when it is necessary to perform delegated tasks.
For example, a worker authorized to work
only on a certain machine
would exceed his authority
by moving to another machine
if his own machine broke down.
A more specific example would be a manager
who spends money allocated for service purposes
on personal needs,
which exceeds the limits of his authority
on the use of representative resources.
In general, the limits of authority
are expanding in the direction of higher levels of management.
But even the authority of the higher management
is limited in one way or another.
The chairman of the board of directors
and the president of a large open shareholder company
must answer to shareholders
if the costs are much higher than the total budget, for example.
Higher officials of the company
cannot raise their salaries,
use the resources of the organization
without the approval of the board of directors.
Most of the authority of the manager
is determined by traditions,
morals, cultural stereotypes,
customs of the society
in which the organization functions.
People obey the orders of the boss
partly because it is a socially acceptable behavior.
Authority and power are often confused.
Authority is defined as delegated,
limited,
inherent in this position
the right to use the resources of the organization.
And power is a real ability to act
or an opportunity to influence the situation.
You can have power without authority.
Authorities determine that a person
who occupies some position has the right to do,
and the authorities determine
that he can really do.
Linear authorities
are authorities that are transferred
directly from the boss to the subordinate
and then to other subordinates.
It is linear authorities
that represent the authorized authority
to direct their direct subordinates
to achieve the set goals.
Delegation of linear authorities
creates a hierarchy of levels of management of the organization.
The process of creating a hierarchy
is called a scalar process.
Since the authority to be controlled by people
is usually transmitted through a scalar process,
the resulting hierarchy is called
a scalar chain or a chain of commands.
The concept of the formal chain of commands
was applied back in 1491 BC.
The ancients saw that the best way
to ensure the clarity of coordination
is that the subordinate
should answer only to one boss
and give orders only to one boss.
This principle is currently called
the principle of unanimity.
This is probably the oldest established principle of the organization.
In an organization that adheres to this principle,
all formal communications
should be directed along the chain of commands.
An employee cannot address any question
through the head of his boss
or the head of a higher rank
without the permission of the boss of the intermediate level.
Probably the most obvious example
of the chain of commands
is the hierarchy of military organizations.
Military of a certain rank
are easily distinguished from military of a higher or lower level
by the bandaging of the badges.
Here the hierarchy is really called a chain of commands.
In the case of the organization,
all employees from the president to the last office worker
wear the same clothes,
but the chain of commands still exists.
Looking at the example of the plant in Roslevo-Sokol,
you can see that the cashier obeys the chief accountant,
who is in turn subordinate to the vice president,
and the vice president obeys the president of the company.
The norm of the management,
the norm of the management is established
by delegating linear powers.
The head of the higher rank,
instead of creating a chain of commands,
may require that each employee
reports to him personally
in order to maintain, perhaps, more control.
However, in practice, the inability to keep the norm of the management
at a fairly low level
means that the magnitude of the norm of the management
varies widely.
The level of management,
the nature of the tasks performed,
the characteristics of the subordinates and the abilities of the head
all play a role in determining the number of people
directly and effectively controlled by the head.
A number of authors consider the best norm of the management
to be from 7 to 10 subordinates.
In many organizations, it is 30-40 employees or more.
In general, if the manager
is constantly closely interacting with the subordinates,
the norm of the management should be small.
And in cases when the need is absent in direct communication,
the norm can be increased.
Perform the practical task number 1.
Draw a structural diagram of your company
and analyze it from the point of view
of the number of levels of management.
Determine the norm of the management for various units.
Think about the impact of which factors
determines the norm of the management in a particular unit.
Before trying to determine the staff powers,
let's briefly consider the origin of the administrative apparatus
to understand why in some situations
linear powers cannot meet the needs of the organization.
The first concept of the staff was used
in the armies of Alexander the Great,
that is, in 336-323 BC.
It was difficult for an officer in the heat of battle
to effectively command his people
and simultaneously develop strategic plans.
But since planning and management
are absolutely necessary for victory in any military operation,
a way to ensure them should be found.
It was decided to divide the task of achieving victory
in the wars between two types of military specialists
– officers who make plans
and officers who command soldiers in battle.
However, this division has created a potential problem.
Since soldiers are obliged to obey the orders of all officers,
they could easily get confused in a situation
when the orders given to the officers on planning
contradict the orders of their direct boss.
To avoid this, the powers of commanding people
were taken away from the planners,
and since they were the assistants of the senior officer,
they were called the staff.
The staff apparatus of the organization can be classified
into three main types –
consultative apparatus, service apparatus and personal apparatus.
However, in practice, it is very rare to find such a division
between these types.
The duty of the consultative apparatus
is to consult the line leadership
in their field of knowledge.
This can be law, technology,
training, work with personnel, etc.
In any field where a consultative apparatus is used,
its functions are often distributed
to perform certain services.
For example, the personnel department,
which conducts the personal affairs of the employees,
finds and checks potential candidates for work
and, in some cases, supplies the line leadership
the required personnel.
Thus, the department performs both consultative
and service functions.
The personal apparatus is a variety of service apparatus
that is formed when the manager
is appointed to perform the tasks
of the manager.
In the organization, the member of this apparatus
has no powers,
he acts only on the instructions of the manager.
However, he can have great power.
To understand the concept of the apparatus in modern organizations,
it is necessary to consider the nature of the powers delegated to him.
Staff powers can be limited,
but they can be purely consultative
or so common that the border between them
and the line duties almost disappears.
Let's consider the basic types of staff powers
and the basis of their application.
When the staff powers are reduced to the recommended powers,
it is assumed that the line leadership
will consult the consultative apparatus
when it needs its knowledge.
But the line leaders are not obliged to do so.
They can solve the problem in their own way,
without even making the apparatus known.
When the staff powers of the apparatus are recommended,
it often has to spend time
convincing the line leaders
about the value of its services and proposals.
Even if they appealed for advice to the apparatus
and it was accepted, the line leaders can still neglect it,
which can undoubtedly lead to conflicts
between the line leadership and the administrative and management apparatus.
Since the apparatus may experience difficulties
in communication with the line leadership,
the company sometimes expands the powers of the apparatus
to mandatory agreements.
When the agreements are mandatory,
the line leadership must discuss the appropriate situation
with the staff apparatus before taking any action.
However, the line leaders are not obliged
to follow the recommendations of the apparatus.
The higher management can expand the powers of the apparatus,
giving it the right to reject the decisions of the line leadership.
The goal of parallel powers
is to establish a control system
to balance power
and prevent gross mistakes.
In many companies,
parallel powers are used
to control financial expenses,
which requires two signatures
in the case of all major purchases.
The apparatus, which has functional powers,
can offer and prohibit some actions
in the field of its competence.
In fact, the line powers of the president of the organization
are implemented through the apparatus,
but the apparatus is not able to do this.
The functional powers eliminate the difference
between the line and the staff powers
for all practical purposes.
In large organizations,
the apparatus can consist of many people.
In such situations, the apparatus is a division
with more than one level of management.
That is, the staff apparatus itself has a linear organization
Delegation requires effective communication,
and the subordinates must understand exactly
what the leader wants.
Delegation is also related to motivation,
influence and leadership.
The leader must make the subordinates
to effectively perform their tasks.
As in all processes of information exchange
and influence, both sides have a significant
role in achieving success.
Taking this into account, William Newman listed
a number of reasons why leaders may
reluctantly delegate powers,
and subordinates will avoid additional responsibility.
So, the reasons for the leaders' reluctance
to delegate powers.
This is a delusion, I will do it better.
This is the lack of ability to lead,
lack of trust in subordinates,
fear of risk, lack of election control
to warn the leadership about possible dangers.
Subordinates avoid responsibility
and block the process of delegating
for the following reasons.
Subordinates may find it more convenient to ask the boss
what to do than to solve the problem themselves.
Subordinates are also afraid of criticism for mistakes.
The more responsibility, the more likely such a mistake.
Subordinates have no information
or resources necessary for the task.
Subordinates may also lack confidence in themselves
or lack positive incentives
to additional responsibility.
To make delegating effective,
there must be a correspondence between powers and responsibility.
That is, the leadership must delegate
powers sufficient for the fulfillment of all tasks
for which he took responsibility.
This is called the principle of correspondence.
High responsibility means more work
and more risk for the person taking it.
Expanding the responsibility of subordinates
should be supported by a system of stimulation,
which provides them with rewards
for taking this time.
Recent studies have shown
that employees have less motivation for work
if they think they give more to the organization
than they receive from it.
As a result, the absence of positive incentives
to take on additional responsibility
can block reasonable attempts to distribute powers.
Do the practical task number two.
Think about how effective the process of delegating
powers in your organization is.
What can you offer to eliminate the reasons
that block delegating?
Centralization and decentralization
Our next topic is centralization and decentralization.
Organizations in which the leadership of the higher link
leaves behind most of the powers
necessary for making the most important decisions
are called centralized.
Decentralized organizations
are such organizations
in which powers are distributed
at the lowest levels of management.
In highly decentralized organizations,
the managers of the middle link
have very great powers in specific areas of activity.
However, in practice, there are no fully centralized
or decentralized organizations.
Such organizations are only the limit points
of a certain continuum
between which all types of structures
that meet in practice lie.
Therefore, any organization can be called centralized
or decentralized only in comparison
with other organizations or in comparison with itself,
but in other periods.
It is possible to determine the level of centralization
in comparison with others
by following its characteristics.
The first of them is the number of decisions
made at the lowest levels of management.
The more decisions made by the lower managers,
the greater the degree of decentralization.
The second characteristic is the importance of decisions
made at the lowest levels.
In a decentralized organization,
the managers of the middle and lower links
can make decisions related to the costs
of significant material and labor resources
or the direction of the organization's activity
in a new direction.
The next characteristic is the consequences of decisions
made at the lowest levels.
If the managers of the middle and lower links
can make decisions affecting more than one function,
then the organization is, apparently, decentralized.
The next characteristic is the number of control
over the work of subordinates.
In a highly decentralized organization,
the management of the higher link rarely checks
the daily decisions of its subordinates.
Based on the assumption that all these decisions are correct,
the assessment of the actions of the management
is based on the total achieved results,
profitability and growth of the organization.
Within the same organization,
some departments can be more centralized than others.
For example, in the McDonald's restaurant network,
the managers of the restaurants have almost unlimited power
to make decisions regarding their staff
and some powers in the selection of purchased products.
In this company, decisions on the placement
of new restaurants and stores
are made in the middle management links,
while decisions determining the price level
and the release of new goods
are made only by the higher management.
In ordinary hospitals, administrative functions
have a high degree of centralization,
but the medical staff and, first of all,
the doctors are almost completely autonomous
and independent in their actions.
In large part of decentralized organizations,
the higher management leaves the right
to make decisions on issues such as
determining the common goals and tasks of the organization,
strategic planning,
formulation of company policies in various areas,
development of the company's financial and accounting system.
Most corporations have a decentralized organization.
Their general structure is based on the principle
of federal decentralization,
in which the managers of the most important departments
can act almost completely autonomously
in everything that concerns the production of their products.
Both centralization and decentralization
have their disadvantages and advantages,
the ratio of which is determined by external
and internal variables.
The advantages of centralization include
the improvement of control and coordination
of specialized independent functions,
the reduction of the number and scale of error decisions
made by less experienced managers,
the absence of a situation in which
some departments of the organization grow and develop
due to other departments or organizations in general,
and the experience and knowledge of the staff
of the central administrative body
The advantages of decentralization include
simplification of the decision-making process.
Decisions are made by the manager
who is closest to the problem
and, therefore, knows it best.
Decentralization stimulates initiative
and allows the personality to identify itself with the organization.
The manager can feel the same enthusiasm
in his department as independent entrepreneurs
in all their business.
Decentralization helps to prepare the young manager
for higher positions,
giving him the opportunity to make important decisions
at the very beginning of his career.
The disadvantages of centralization are that
it closes the way to the benefits of decentralization.
And vice versa.
The manager must analyze the situation in the organization
and choose the level of decision-making
that best meets its needs.
The need to make radical changes
and a high level of uncertainty of the external environment
are favored by decentralization.
The ratio of centralization and decentralization
should be adequate for the firm's strategy.
During a crisis or in cases
when direct threats arise,
the power and authority, as a rule,
are concentrated in the hands of the top managers of the organization.
Perform the practical task number 3.
Evaluate the ratio of centralization and decentralization
in your company.
What factors have a significant impact on this process?
Our next topic is the design of the organizational structure.
The best structure is the one that best allows the organization
to interact effectively with the external environment,
to distribute and direct the efforts of its employees
productively and purposefully
and thus meet the needs of the clients
and achieve their goals with high efficiency.
The design should be based on the strategic plans of the organization.
This approach was designed
to be able to meet the needs of the organization
This approach was proposed by Alfred Chandler,
who for many years studied the changes
in organizational structures of companies
such as General Motors and DuPont.
His famous principle says
that the strategy determines the structure.
This means that the structure of the organization
should be such to ensure the implementation of its strategy.
Since over time, strategies change,
it will be necessary to make appropriate changes
in organizational structures.
According to the classical theory of organization,
the structure of the organization should be developed from top to bottom.
At the beginning, the managers should divide the organization
into wide areas,
then set specific tasks,
just like in planning,
first general tasks are formed,
then the specific plans are formed,
and finally the organizational design stages.
The sequence of actions will be as follows.
First, divide the organization horizontally
into wide blocks corresponding
to the most important areas of activity
in the implementation of the strategy.
Decide which types of activities should be performed
by linear units, and which by staff units.
Third, determine the ratio of powers of various positions.
At the same time, the management sets a chain of commands
if necessary,
to make further divisions into smaller organizational units
to more effectively use specialization
and avoid overloading the management.
Third, determine the duties
as a combination of certain tasks and functions
and assign them to specific persons.
In organizations whose activity is largely connected
with technology,
the management even develops specific tasks
and assigns them to the direct performers,
who are responsible for their satisfactory performance.
It is important to understand that the organizational structure
that has emerged as a result of the development
is an unhardened form, similar to the frame of a building.
Since organizational structures are based on plans,
significant changes in the plans may require
corresponding changes in the structure.
In fact, in existing organizations,
the process of changing the organizational structure
should be treated as a reorganization,
since this process, like all functions of the organization,
is endless.
Currently, successfully functioning organizations
regularly assess the degree of adequacy
of their organizational structures
and change them as required by external conditions.
The requirements of the external environment,
in turn, are determined during planning and control.
The development of formal rules, policies, instructions, procedures,
descriptions of work, instructions,
in accordance with which management and control
over the activities of employees is carried out
is called formalization.
Such documents complement the organizational scheme,
describing tasks, distributing responsibility
and authority for making management decisions.
The widespread use of such documents
is an integral part of the bureaucratic management model,
the first systematically developed model
of the organizational structure,
which remains its main and dominant form.
The word bureaucracy is usually mentioned
in the picture of the office work,
bad work, useless activity,
long-term expectations to receive certificates
or forms that have long been canceled.
All this really happens.
However, the root cause of all these negative phenomena
is not bureaucracy as such,
but the lack of implementation of the rules of work
and the goals of the organization,
the behavior of employees,
the inappropriate rules and tasks of the organization.
The concept of bureaucracy,
originally formulated by the German sociologist
Max Weber in the early 1900s,
is ideally one of the most useful ideas
in the history of mankind.
Weber's theory did not contain descriptions
of specific organizations.
The idea of a bureaucracy is more like a normative model,
as an ideal to which organizations should strive.
This is clear from the table,
where the characteristics of the system
called Weber's rational bureaucracy
are given in a sum.
The following characteristics are suitable for rational bureaucracy.
First of all, this is a clear division of labor,
which leads to the appearance of highly qualified specialists
in each position.
This is the hierarchy of management levels,
in which each lower level is controlled by the higher one
and subordinated to it.
This is the presence of a interconnected system
of generalized formal rules and standards,
ensuring uniformity of the performance of its responsibilities
and coordination of various tasks.
This is the spirit of formal indifference,
with which official persons perform their official duties
and the implementation of hiring
in strict accordance with the technical and qualification requirements
protected from employees from arbitrary dismissals.
Thus, the bureaucratic organizational structure
is characterized by a high degree of division of labor,
a developed hierarchy of management,
a chain of commands,
the presence of numerous rules and standards of personnel behavior,
a selection of personnel
according to their business and professional qualities.
Weber called such a structure rational,
because it is assumed that decisions made by the bureaucracy
have an objective nature.
Weber believed that the personal preferences
of the owners of the organization and its employees
should not contradict the goals of the organization.
These ideas did not coincide with the practice of working
of most organizations until 1900.
Bureaucracy is often called a classical
or traditional organizational structure.
Most modern organizations
are variants of bureaucracy.
The objectivity of decisions made
allows the bureaucracy to adapt to the changes.
Promotion of employees based on their competencies
allows to ensure constant and consistent
influx of highly qualified and talented technical specialists
and administrative workers.
However, bureaucracy has often been severely criticized.
The difficulties arising in bureaucratic structures
are associated with an increase in the significance
of standardized rules and procedures,
those norms that ensure the proper execution
of their tasks by employees.
The organization, at the same time,
loses the flexibility of behavior.
Departmentalization means the process of dividing the organization
into separate blocks,
which can be called departments,
branches, or sectors.
Functional departmentalization is the process
of dividing the organization into separate elements,
each of which has its own clearly defined
specific task and responsibilities.
In principle, the creation of a functional structure
is reduced to a grouping of staff
on the broad tasks they perform.
In companies that process industry,
this is a division by technology of mass production.
Traditional functional blocks of a company
are departments of production, marketing, and finance.
In organizations not related to business,
the names of functional departments
are the most diverse.
In the army, for example,
there are infantry, artillery, and armored units.
In hospitals there are administrative and medical departments.
If the size of all organizations or this department is large,
then the main functional departments
can be divided into smaller functional departments.
The structure of the organization,
the functional departments of which are divided
into secondary units, are the most important.
A functional structure stimulates
business and professional specialization,
reduces duplication of efforts
and consumption of material resources,
improves coordination in functional areas.
A well-known example of regional organizational structures
can be household organizations of large companies.
An example of the use of a regional structure
outside of a commercial organization
can be the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia.
It is known to the embassies and consulates of Russia around the world.
Many other government institutions,
especially those such as the Tax Service,
which are constantly dealing with their clients,
also apply a regional structure.
The relative advantages and disadvantages
of regional organizational structures are similar to those
of products and consumers.
Various types of divisional structures
have the same advantages and disadvantages
because they have the same goal
to ensure a more effective reaction of the organization
to one or another factor of the environment.
A product structure allows
to easily cope with the development of new types of products
based on the concept of competition,
improvement of technology
or satisfaction of the consumer's needs.
A regional structure allows the organization
to more effectively take into account local legislation,
the social and economic system and markets
as the geographical expansion of its market zones.
As for the structure oriented to the consumer,
it gives the organization the opportunity
to most effectively take into account the requests of those consumers
from whom it depends the most.
Thus, the choice of a divisional structure
should be based on which of these factors
is the most important
in terms of ensuring the implementation
of the organization's strategic plans and achieving its goals.
Perform the practical task number 4.
Analyze how much the principles of rational bureaucracy
are implemented in your organization.
What type of departmentalization is typical for your company?
Organization structures of companies operating on international markets.
For a similar organization operating on the scale of one country,
companies operating at the international level
should choose an organizational structure
that corresponds to their strategy.
The choice of an organizational structure of such companies
is determined by three main strategic factors.
First, how to encourage the organization
operating mainly within the country
to fully use the opportunities available abroad
for its growth.
Second, how to most effectively use the knowledge of production
and various geographical regions
in order to coordinate business activity
at the international level.
Third, how to coordinate the activities of foreign branches
and branches in many countries,
while preserving their own face.
Since organizational structures of international corporations
are very difficult to analyze,
we will limit ourselves to a brief overview of their basic types.
An entrepreneur who wants to enter the foreign market
with one or several types of new products
usually introduces a position of an export manager,
which is subordinated to the management of the marketing department.
Companies that have significantly increased
the volume of sales on foreign markets
will begin to study the possibility of creating
their own production capacities in the corresponding countries.
However, for foreign sales
in the total volume of the produced product,
the share of these foreign sales
will remain relatively small.
The head of each foreign production branch
is subordinate to the executive director or president of the entire company.
At the same time, the central management of the company
usually provides assistance to its foreign branches
in matters of production,
marketing, financial and human resources.
A certain part of the staff of the company's main management
is transferred to foreign branches
in order to ensure the effective implementation
of strategic plans and tasks of the company as a whole.
As the company's business activity
on the international markets grows,
it usually creates a special international branch.
At the same time, all functions
that ensure the activity of the company on foreign markets
are concentrated in this branch.
The position of the head of such a branch is established,
and it is subordinate to the president of the company.
As a rule, such a head has a fairly wide authority
in all functions and activities of foreign branches.
The divisional structure with the international branch
is presented in the following slide.
Companies that create a divisional structure
with an international branch
have a relatively small volume of foreign sales
compared to sales within the country,
a limited product nomenclature
and a geography of foreign markets.
However, as the volume of foreign sales increases,
the expansion of the assortment of produced products
and the promotion of the company to new economic regions,
the international divisional structure
begins to constrain the company.
At this point, the organizations usually move
to the formation of a global structure.
The global product structure
and the global regional structure
are shown in the following slides.
The global product structure is most suitable
for those companies that have a greater difference
between the types of products produced
than the difference between the regions
in which they are sold.
The difference in production is often due to the fact
that the company produces a wide range of products
that require various technologies.
If the organization is structured
according to the produced product,
it is much easier to achieve the necessary
technological export specializations and coordination.
The geographical regional structure
is more suitable for those
where regional differences are more important
Regional differences are often due to the fact
that various foreign clients of the company
are concentrated in regions with different traditions,
legislation, culture and consumption of products.
As a result, the organization's design
is carried out according to the criteria
of customer demand and marketing methods
in these regions.
Perform the practical task number 5.
It is a question of the technical situation
that has developed in one of the Russian metallurgical companies
and the answer to the questions of the case.
Since the 1960s, some organizations
have faced such a situation
when the external conditions of their activities
have changed so quickly.
Projects have become so complex,
that the organizational structure
of the company has become more complex.
The structure of the traditional organizational structure,
especially where the chain of command is long,
can slow down the interaction
and the process of development of solutions
to such an extent that the organization
could no longer effectively react to the changes.
In order for organizations to be able
to implement new technology,
adaptive organizational structures have been developed.
The structures are called adaptive
because they can be quickly modified
in accordance with the changes in the environment
and the needs of the organization itself.
Another name for these more flexible systems
is organic structures.
It is connected with their ability
to adapt to the changes in the environment
and to adapt to the changes in the environment
in accordance with the changes in the environment.
Organic or adaptive structures
are not just some kind of variation of bureaucracy
as is the divisional structure.
The organic structure is built on the goals
and assumptions radically different
from those that lie at the base of bureaucracy.
Organic structures are built on the goals
and assumptions radically different
from those that lie at the base of bureaucracy.
Each specialist solves his task
as something separate from the real tasks
before the organization as a whole.
In the case of an organic structure,
employees must solve their specific tasks
in the light of the tasks of the company as a whole.
This is because they must be constantly reviewed
as a result of interaction with other participants
in solving this task.
This interaction occurs both vertically and horizontally.
Interaction between employees of different ranks
is like a consultation of two colleagues
than an order from the boss to a subordinate.
It should be noted that organic and bureaucratic structures
are just two extreme points in the continuum of structures,
and the real structures of real organizations
lie between them, having signs of both bureaucratic
and organic structures in different ratios.
have signs of both bureaucratic and organic structures in different ratios.
In addition, it often happens that
various divisions within one organization
have different structures.
Often, for example, the management of an organization
uses mechanical, that is, bureaucratic structures
and in scientific and research organizations — organic structures.
The dependence of the structure of an organization
on the pace of the environment is shown in the following slide.
In order to effectively manage large-scale projects
of limited duration,
for example, the construction of a building
or the launch of a spaceship,
more and more organizations began to use
special project organization.
A project organization is a temporary structure
created to solve a specific task.
Its purpose is to bring together
the most qualified employees of the organization
to carry out a complex project
in the set time and set quality level,
without going beyond the set cost.
When the project is completed, the team is disbanded,
its members move on to a new project,
return to their permanent work in their home department
or leave the organization.
The main advantage of a project organization
is that it concentrates all efforts
on solving a single task.
While the head of a regular department
must be split between several projects at the same time,
the project manager focuses
exclusively on him.
In the so-called clean or combined project structures,
a temporary group of specialists
is essentially a reduced-scale copy
of the permanent functional structure
of the given organization.
In this case, the project manager
is fully subordinate to all the members of the group
and all the resources allocated to solve this task.
Clean project structures are used
only to solve any large-scale tasks.
Another type of project structure
is called a matrix organization.
The beginning of the use of a matrix organization
was assumed by medium-sized aerospace companies
in the 1950s and 1960s.
These companies were too small
to be an effective clean project organization.
Nevertheless, they were large enough
to face the problems of functional structures
in which the integration of information about the project
takes place only at the very top of the pyramid of management.
Such companies as General Electric and Shell Oil
conducted experiments
on applying the project structure
to the permanent functional structure for these organizations.
The diagram of such a structure
is shown in the following slide.
It resembles a lattice, hence the name of the matrix structure.
In a matrix organization,
the members of the project group
are subordinate to both the project manager
and the managers of the functional departments
in which they work constantly.
The project manager has so-called project powers.
These powers can vary
from almost omnipresent personal linear power
to almost pure staff powers.
The choice of a specific option
is determined by the rights delegated to it
by the higher management of the organization.
Project managers are responsible in general
for the integration of all types of activities and resources
related to this project.
They are also responsible for planning the project
and check the course of the project.
The functional departments
delegate some of their responsibilities to the project manager.
They decide where and how a particular work should be done,
as well as control the course of the task.
The main drawback of the matrix structure
is its complexity.
A lot of problems arise
due to the addition of vertical and horizontal powers,
which undermines the principle of unanimity.
There is a struggle for power,
conformity in the adoption of group decisions,
excessive overhead costs.
Despite these possible difficulties,
the matrix structure, if used effectively,
gives the organization the opportunity
to gain some advantages.
It allows to achieve certain flexibilities
that are never present in functional structures,
but are constantly fixed
behind certain functional departments.
As new projects appear,
labor resources can be flexibly redistributed
depending on the specific needs of each project.
In addition to a much greater flexibility,
the matrix organization gives a greater opportunity
to coordinate the work typical for division structures.
This is achieved by creating a position
of the project manager,
who coordinates all the connections
between project participants
working in various functional departments.
Note that in matrix organizations,
the divisional command structure
can have a different orientation,
for example, a product one, as shown in the following slide.
For companies operating on international markets,
the duality of the management chain
is the main reason for contradictions
arising in the matrix structure.
At the same time, it is successfully used
by such companies as IBM, Ford Motor, and others.
Another approach to creating adaptive organizational structures
is associated with the emergence of a conglomerate type organization.
This is not some established or orderly structure,
but a type of organization
that is best suited for a given specific situation.
Thus, in one department of the company
a product structure can be used,
in another a functional structure,
and in the third a project or matrix structure.
The leadership of the higher link of the corporation
is responsible for long-term planning,
development of policy,
as well as the implementation of the project.
This central group is surrounded by a number of companies
that are either independent economic units
or in fact independent companies.
These companies are fully autonomous
in relation to operational decisions.
They are subordinate to the main company
mainly in matters of finance.
It is expected that they will achieve the intended profit indicators,
and that they will be able to provide a stable and stable business.
It is expected that they will achieve the intended profit indicators
and will keep the costs within the limits
established for the entire conglomerate by the leadership of the higher link.
There is almost no interdependence
between the individual companies
that are part of the conglomerate,
unlike typical departmentalization.
The conglomerate can sell any company
that is part of it due to its unsatisfactory activity
and will not be able to buy a company with good economic indicators.
These changes will not even be noticed
by other units of the conglomerate.
These opportunities made the conglomerates very popular
among entrepreneurs in science-intensive industries,
where it is necessary to quickly switch to new types of products
and quickly stop the production of outdated products.
The latest approach to departmentalization
involves further development of the idea of coordination
and cooperation in a horizontal plane within the framework of the organization.
The network structure means
that the company assigns many of its main functions
to independent sub-counteragents,
and it itself takes the form of a small head organization
coordinating their activities.
The network organization is usually depicted
as a node or center
surrounded by a network of third-party entities.
Accounting, production, design, logistics, distribution
and other functions are assigned to third-party organizations.
With the help of the Internet and computer networks,
the exchange of information between them happens so quickly
that this separate system acts as a single company.
Such a company achieves high results
in its activity by using the network
and the network of third-party entities.
The organization is also responsible
for the high results of its activities
by using a smaller volume of resources
due to the fact that all the necessary special functions
are performed by professionals
with the appropriate competencies.
The disadvantages of network structures can be attributed
to the lack of direct management control,
the possibility of undesirable loss of organizational parts,
low loyalty of employees
and the lack of a proper management of corporate culture.
There is no optimal organization structure for all situations.
As in all management processes,
there is only the most suitable way
for this situation in the design of organizations.
The relative effectiveness of a particular type
of organizational structure
is determined by various external and internal factors.
If some organizations function
in an environment different from that of other organizations,
then, accordingly, the structures should also differ.
Another important factor in the design of an organization
is related to its integration
or, as it is often called, coordination of organizations.
In order for our body to be healthy and agile,
it needs a well-coordinated muscle system,
a breathing system, blood circulation,
a nervous system, a central nervous system,
and the most important condition for the organization's effectiveness
is the unity of goals.
It is not enough for each unit
to work effectively on its own.
If one or two units are not integrated
in the overall structure of the organization,
the organization will not be successful.
The methods of achieving effective integration
are shown in the following slide.
Such methods of integration, as a rule,
procedures, schedules, hierarchical management structures
have proven to be good
in this type of environment
that characterizes by relative stability,
predictability,
slow market changes
of the technologies used by the competitors.
Such methods of integration, as personal relationships,
joint committees,
inter-functional creative teams and working groups,
as well as inter-individual meetings,
have proven to be good
in this type of environment
that characterizes by mobility, variability,
rapid market changes and technologies used.
If an organization or its unit
is characterized by the use of technologies
and the use of different products,
more diverse tasks and qualified workforce,
it will be possible to achieve a successful integration.
The next topic is
the modern approaches to integration.
the modern approaches to building organizational structures
and situational factors affecting the choice of structure.
In modern conditions,
the majority of technical and non-technical tasks
are based on knowledge.
Companies no longer need
numerous unqualified workforce for assembly lines.
Most of the work requires technical knowledge
and trained workers.
Moreover, the smallest number of workers
is engaged in production of products.
The majority of employees of the organization
perform such work as marketing,
design, technical design,
technical and economic analysis,
accounting, management.
This requires professional experience and knowledge.
The majority of the work is engaged
in services in commercial and other organizations.
According to estimates,
one third of all jobs are already occupied
by highly productive teams,
whose representatives can be called intellectual workers.
The very nature of intellectual work,
which includes information gathering,
creative search, experiments,
is a key part of intellectual work.
In certain conditions,
remote control from the manager
interferes with work.
Managers are aimed at performing the work
if the executors feel that
their group is being paid attention to.
The norms of bureaucracy do not imply
the care for the workers,
but their complete submission and loyalty to the manager.
Bureaucracy is too autocratic
and guided by norms to motivate
intellectual activity and manage it.
Creativity and joint work require
an interested attitude, personal responsibility,
flexibility in thinking and actions.
In fact, the so-called norms of bureaucracy
block innovation and care for people,
and contradict the meaning of modern activity.
Many bureaucratic researchers emphasize
that in a bureaucratic organization
proper attention is not paid to training workers as an innovation,
to teamwork and to attention to others.
For many years, corporations have used
effective methods of training creativity
and rationalization thinking,
but this training was aimed at correcting
mistakes in education.
In modern conditions, it is necessary to acquire
experience of working in a collective,
to show initiative and responsibility in joint activity,
to be able to participate in self-management.
As experience shows,
bureaucratic systems,
having pre-implemented the discipline of the team chain,
do not have enough variety of means
to solve the existing problems.
Meanwhile, each active innovation in management
is based on the strength of the team,
on inter-functional and inter-linear working groups.
Organizations become more informed
when they find an opportunity to use
a variety of knowledge of each person in the team for common goals.
With the transition of workers from static work
to solving a number of problems,
it becomes necessary to use project management.
Each project requires, as a rule,
the creation of interdisciplinary groups.
Control functions go from the bureaucratic system
to the project teams.
Increasing number of works requires
the unification of knowledge and experience of various specialists.
Less and less work is done
within the framework of only one specialization.
The project worker should be both a narrow specialist
and have a wider knowledge.
Rough intervention of the management
in the activities of the project teams inevitably leads to contradictions,
to unnecessary difficulties in solving the tasks.
In an intellectual organization,
the involvement of workers in the project teams
allows to promptly identify all the problem nodes.
At the same time, the mechanism of feedback with the consumers
is also important.
In these conditions, the tasks that arise again are solved
not by increasing the number of workers,
but on the basis of increasing their qualifications and interoperability,
strengthening the flexibility of the workforce
by conducting multifunctional training.
In order for the organization to become adaptive,
the preferences of consumers should have a significant influence
on the activities of the workers.
The process of transmitting such information through managers is very slow.
In addition, they may not always know
the internal needs of the company and the needs of the market.
If the internal consumer cannot quickly get what is necessary,
the system cannot operate
and flexibly serve external consumers.
The freedom of choice between alternative suppliers
gives users of internal services the rights
that external consumers use.
At the same time, the emphasis shifts from the power of managers
to the power of consumers.
In a bureaucratic system,
the coordination of work with each other at its level
is not included in the duties of the workers.
In a post-bureaucratic organization,
most of the inter-functional connections
and even many common issues are solved at the level of the working groups.
Working teams, including workers of all functionalities,
have the authority to make decisions on all issues.
Instead of fighting bureaucracy,
teams work together.
They study the market,
determine the value of each product,
its characteristics,
appearance and methods of operation.
The reality has become so complex and multifaceted
that there is no point in dividing the organization into chains
where teams will be transferred to solve each emerging problem.
As a result, integration is achieved
not hierarchically,
but at one inter-functional communication level.
In a modern organization,
information is transmitted directly without intermediaries.
Relations of alienation, formality and inequality
are replaced by relations of openness,
honesty and relative equality.
These new realities are designed to completely change the organization.
The highest point of the listed trends
is a new type of organization
called the training organization.
There is no common opinion
that what a training organization is.
Rather, it is an installation or philosophy
of the organization's most desirable portrait.
In the following slide,
the characteristics of two types of organizations
are compared –
modern training and traditional vertical.
In a traditional organization,
a vertical structure prevails.
Horizontal coordination is carried out
by a few special groups,
teams or project managers.
Information flows are formalized
and from bottom to top in the hierarchy of management.
Information exchange is limited.
In addition, tasks are divided into narrow,
specialized tasks of the operation,
and employees are usually not entitled
to determine how to perform them.
The culture is rigid,
does not encourage risk and change.
Decisions are made centrally.
The organization is a place
where each employee participates
in the identification and solution of problems,
which opens up opportunities
for continuous experiments,
changes, improvements,
which develops its ability to grow,
to learn and to achieve the goal.
The training organization is characterized
by the strict adoption of decisions,
the empowerment of employees
and a strong adaptive culture.
In modern training organizations,
there is no usual vertical structure
separating the top from the bottom,
and the units of structural division
are not functional departments,
but working streams and core processes.
The organization is a place
where employees are trained
to create new goods or to fulfill orders.
They work hand in hand,
which significantly simplifies communication
and coordination of joint efforts.
The bricks from which the training organization is made
are self-managed teams
including employees of different specialties,
who directly contact the buyers
and, if necessary, make adjustments
to the implementation of the operation and the produced product.
The team members have the right
to decide on a wide range of issues
affecting the organization and production.
Training, security,
leave schedule, work methods,
payment and reward system,
and the organization's core values
are not based on strengthening the boundaries
with other companies,
but on their elimination.
Cooperation between organizations
is provided by combining
self-managed and virtual teams,
alliances and partnerships,
virtual organizations and other structural innovations.
To be able to identify the needs
and solve the problems,
employees must be able to orient themselves
in what is happening around them,
understand the organization's overall activity
and also realize their place in it.
Therefore, each of them needs access
to data such as budgets,
department expenses, revenue indicators.
Electronic communication is one of the most important aspects
of information exchange and knowledge.
Computer networks, Internet technologies,
intranets and extranets
all contribute to redistributing knowledge,
to presenting information to those
who really need it,
to the constant contact between employees.
However, a great deal of importance
is given to personal communication
and, above all, to the ability to listen to each other.
In traditional organizations,
decisions are passed up in a hierarchy for approval.
The right and responsibility of making decisions
lies with those who are closest to the problem.
In traditional vertical organizations,
top managers are responsible
for the development of the strategy,
and those who have the necessary knowledge and experience
to manage the company.
The leaders of the learning organization
also influence the vision, direction and formulation of the strategy,
but not only them.
Everyone participates in the strategic process.
Information is collected by those
who directly contact buyers, suppliers,
other organizations.
It is they who recognize changes,
identify needs and find solutions,
and then offer their ideas
to other members of the organization for discussion.
Another forming strategy of the learning organization
can be partnership relations
with suppliers, buyers and even competitors.
With other companies,
the learning organization sets relatively permeable boundaries,
which opens access to information
about new strategic needs and directions.
Instead of keeping a distance
from buyers and suppliers,
the modern learning organization
brings them into the ranks of partners,
whose efforts are aimed at achieving common goals.
The employees of the learning organization
are endowed with extraordinary powers,
in particular, with the right and even the duty
to choose the ways to achieve the goals set before them.
Endowment with power or delegating
means that the employees are guaranteed
the obtaining of the necessary decisions
and effective activity, freedom,
knowledge and skills.
Instead of a forcible division of the labor process
into strictly defined, narrowly specialized tasks and operations,
the leaders of the learning organization
sanction the independent conduct of the employees of the correctional services
in accordance with the development of the situation.
The number of rules and procedures is reduced to a minimum,
and the right to manage work tasks
is assigned to those who directly perform them.
Corporate culture is a combination of common
key values, beliefs, knowledge and knowledge.
It is the basis of the learning organization.
Corporate culture of the learning organization
encourages openness,
lack of barriers, equality,
continuous improvement and change.
Such an organization always moves forward.
Of course, there are no perfect learning organizations,
but get acquainted at least with the experience of the company
Sheprell Steel and in the course of the implementation
of the practical task number 7
formulate the basic values of the corporate culture
of the learning organization.
What structure should be preferred?
Formal vertical hierarchy
or the one that promotes horizontal coordination and cooperation?
The answer depends on the specific circumstances
in which the company operates
or the situational factors affecting the organizational structure.
Organizational structure studies show
that the choice of a rigid or flexible structure
is determined by such factors as
strategy, external environment,
production technology and interdependence between departments.
The correct structure is the one
that is most suitable for situational factors.
Below we will consider the influence of each of the four factors
on the organizational structure.
Research on the formation of organizational structures
conducted by Chandler on the example of the activities
of the 80 largest companies in the United States
shows that the strategy has a determining effect on the structure.
Changes in the structure follow changes in the strategy.
He found that if the organization is not able to
follow the changes in the strategy,
the results are not effective.
Since the pace of change in the external environment is increasing,
the enterprise should clarify its strategies more often
than it was in the past
to establish their compliance with market requirements.
This means that changes in the strategy
precede changes in the structure and lead to them.
The change in the structure is not a result of the organization's actions
but a result of the changes in the structure and lead to them.
The management structure is more inertial in relation to the strategy
because the factors that affect the choice of the structure
change slower in time
than those that affect the choice of the strategy.
The slide shows a simplified continuum
illustrating the interconnection of structural approaches
and strategic goals.
A pure functional structure
is the most adequate organization
focused on improving internal efficiency
by using resources
but it is not able to provide flexibility or innovation.
On the contrary, a team structure
is recommended by the organization
whose goal is to increase the degree of flexibility
and accelerate innovation processes.
A team structure facilitates the process of building
reorganization changes and a temporary response
to changes occurring in the external environment
but at the expense of less productive use of resources.
The compliance of the environment and structure
is also a necessary condition for the effectiveness
of organizational activity.
The situational interconnections between external uncertainty
and the structural approach are reflected in the following slide.
The relatively stable external environment
is the most adequate traditional organizational structure
with emphasis on vertical management.
In these circumstances,
there is practically no need for changes
more close coordination or increase in flexibility.
The emphasis can be placed on specialization
centralized decision-making and wide-scale control.
If the variability of the external environment is relatively large
the horizontal structure is more preferable.
The structure should also correspond to the production technology.
The technology includes knowledge,
tools of labor, methods and types of activities
aimed at transforming the incoming resources
of the organization into ready-made products.
Equipment, staff qualification
and work ethics are also related to technology.
The organization should be able to perform
its tasks in a more efficient and efficient way.
The most authoritative study
on the data of 100 British companies
on the interdependence of production technologies
and organizational structures
was conducted by the English sociologist John Woodward.
The following basic structural characteristics
of the organization were analyzed.
Administrative leadership, control standards,
and the ability to manage the organization